---
layout: post
title: Delays
date: 2018-03-07 18:32:00
description: More and more delays
img: delays.jpg # Add image post (optional)
tags: [nas,amazon] # add tag
toc: true
---

Waiting for things to arrive. And racking up the downloads while doing so.

First on the waiting list is my new sata controller - the Sodial 4port (2 internal SATA, 1 external SATA and 1 internal IDE). With the onboard controller I can only host 4 drives, which is enough to be getting on with, bit I'd like to make the most of the case and get up to 6 drives. Being a slightly retro kind of dude, the thought of the IDE port made me happy in a completely irrational non-functional way.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/img/amazon_sodial.png" alt="Sodial. Never came." class="image-large image-centre" caption="The Sodial 4 port SATA PCI card." %}

However, this card was sold on the 8th of Feb, and I've been waiting almost a month for it. The supplier has offered a refund that I think I will take them up on, although £5 is not anything I'm too worried about. The month sitting on my hands is something that's far more irritating.

So I've ordered another one.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/img/amazon_semlos.png" alt="Semlos. Hopefully coming sooner." class="image-large image-centre" caption="The Semlos 4 port SATA PCI card." %}

This is the Semlos card, which is more expensive, but has 4 usable ports, and has in it's favour an important attribute: it might actually arrive.

The last bit of kit that I thought might come in handy is a caddy to mount a proper drive for the OS:

{% include figure image_path="/assets/img/amazon_caddy.png" alt="A place to put your drive." class="image-large image-centre" caption="PCI drive bracket." %}

My first plan was to put the OS on the flash drive, but having read some horror stories about flash drives dying and the performance hit you might take, I am leaning towards using a proper drive.
