---
layout: post
title: "ZorinOS 15"
date: 2019-10-14
description: Some ordered thoughts on ZorinOS 15
img: lxc_fedora.jpg # Add image post (optional)
tags: [distro,ZorinOS,phoronix] # add tag
toc: true
---

# Enter the crowded world of distro reviews

Why does the world need another Distro review? Well, it doesn't really. Reviews are opinions, and the Internet is a globe sized dumpster fire of opinions. The world right now really doesn't need another opinion. Rather, as with purpose of the other articles on this blog, this is less of a review and more evidence of evening spent doing something other than  tinkering randomly. It's an attempt to order my thoughts, and lend some structure to something that I just felt like doing: installing Zorin OS and playing with it. I'm not being paid. I doing this because I  want to exercise my curiosity, my brain, and finally, my writing skills. 

In doing so I've played with other things: phoronix test suite, Evolution, Brasero, and a heap of other things that I normally don't go near. This has been an open source software adventure,  a rabbit hole that Alice would  be proud of.

# The  methodology

There are 2 aspects to this adventure:
1. Walk a mile the moccasins. This is the easier of the two aspects. The goal is to embrace the desktop and see how much  it enables a 'normal'  day's work. To do this I've got a couple of tasks
    
    1. Install it on the test hardware, in this case a 2011 Macbook Pro, the one that suffered from the broken AMD discreet graphics after 5 or so years. This renders is completely useless for MacOS, but has the upside of leaving me a nice bit of kit to install Linux on, as the embedded intel graphics work just fine.
    2. Try  and produce a blog article on it. That means  installing PyCharm Community Edition, a ruby build chain (for Jekyll), Gimp (to make  the header graphics)
    3. Because writing takes a  long time, test the media playback abilities (e.g. right now I'm listening  to Beck MellowGold via Bluetooth)
    4. Some light web  browsing and Youtubing because internets. 
    
2. Some hard figures and facts. Lies, damned lies  and benchmarks. This is an interesting one, as because I this is the first time I'm doing this, I don't really have a baseline. Benchmarking software is great at spitting  out numbers  but a  lot of the time they are only valuable  when in comparison to something e.g. the same test run on a different platform. 

# The hardware

There are 4 machines at play:

Two baseline machines:
1. Combretum - probably the best hardware I own. A 2015 Macbook pro, with 16 Gigs of ram and 4th generation Core-I7 processor running at 3.40GHz. It was one of the last models of MacBook Pros before Apple decided USB ports were too 90's, and instead of function keys you needed a mini touch screen on top of your keyboard. 
2. Ouhout - a second machine purchased from BargainHardware.co.uk. It's a also a 4 Generation Core I7 quad core, with 16 Gigs of ram. It has a GeForce 1030 in it, which means that this  machines wins anything that requires any graphics processing.

Two test rigs:
3. The aforementioned 2011 Macbook  Pro with the dodgy graphics card. When it was new it was sleek and sexy slice of aluminium joy. Now, compared to modern Macs is a wheezing silver gorilla. The graphics card has died and the battery has exploded (slowly). The latter has been replaced and the former has been ignored. With all that said it's still a quad core machine with 8Gigs of ram, which is still above entry level for a 2019 laptop. 
4. Another more ancient Macbook Pro, this time dating from 2008. It's a Core-2 Duo, with 4 Gigs of ram. It overheats in about 4 minutes after startup, and is a stark reminder that back in 2008 we were much happier waiting for software to think about things. Again, this was a beast in it's day. I remember running a windows VM on it and processing photographs using Adobe Lightroom, which is itself not a slouch. It took a long time; there was much coffee drunk and television watched, but I did it.

# Finally, ZorinOS

ZorinOS is one of many distros that is on my list to review. It bubbled to the top for 2 reasons: firstly, I met one of the creators Artyom Zorin (well, when I say  *met*, I went to a Dublin Linux Community Meetup and he was in the same room), so there is an Ireland connection there which is fun, and secondly, I listened to the excellent interview that the same man, Artyom Zorin, did with the internet's own Jason Evangelho on his podcast [Linux for Everyone](https://linuxforeveryone.fireside.fm/11). It seemed like the universe was trying to tell me something. Also, I needed to have something to talk about if your man ever comes to another Meetup.

# What is Zorin
ZorinOS 15 is user focused distro based on Ubuntu Bionic. Although there is obvious attempt to hide that fact that it's Ubuntu based, it's not obvious. The usual Ubuntu identifiers have been removed in favour of 'ZorinOS' e.g. ansible's setup module returns the following interesting mix of facts:

```yaml
        "ansible_distribution": "Zorin OS", 
        "ansible_distribution_major_version": "15", 
        "ansible_distribution_release": "bionic", 
        "ansible_distribution_version": "15",
        ...
        "ansible_os_family": "Zorin OS"
``` 
The obvious hint there is the distribution release of 'bionic'. 

But this is good news. It means that if you're used to Ubuntu, ZorinOS will feel very comfortable. Once I'd adjusted my various 'when:' blocks into include 'Zorin OS', all my bootstrapping scripts worked out of the box. It going to have access to the whole of the ubuntu software archive, and good compatibility with third party products like Steam. Additionally, Bionic is Ubuntu 18.04, which is an LTS version, which means that the base of Zorin OS is the 'Volvo' of operating systems. It's not exciting and it's not going to have the latest and greatest kernel and hardware support, but it's going to super stable. Given that Zorin OS is positioning itself as an easy to use, beginner friendly distro, this is probably a good choice.

ZorinOS comes in a couple of different flavours. There is an Ultimate version which which will set you back 39 Euros plus tax. There is a Core edition, which appears to be the guts of the Ultimate version but without some of the goodies that they've written for the desktop, such as their different 'Layouts' (A MacOS layout, Windows Layout, etc ). There is also a 'light' version, which looks like it's a couple of versions behind (being 12.4), and an Education edition. Seeing that was very much in the mode of 'dipping a toe in the water', and decided to be commitmentphobe[^1] and go with the Core version.

# Slipping on the Zorin Slippers

The installation completed without a problem. I opted for a vanilla  setup and accepted the 'Use my whole drive' option during the setup. I'm usually tempted to dive down a BTRFS rabbit hole when it comes to selecting a file system, but seeing as I wanted to benchmark this machine, I decided to try keep things as simple as possible.

The first impression of Zorin OS is a very comfortable, familiar looking desktop with a task bar along the bottom, a start menu at the bottom left, and some suspiciously 'system tray-ish' looking icons and a clock at the bottom left. The start menu works as expected; it contains a list of application categories on the left, and some common locations (Documents, Home, Downloads, etc) on the right. The menu is searchable, so   
    








[^1]: I have revised this decision and I have since purchased the Ultimate version. I don't really want to get into a debate about 'paying for Linux'. It's my opinion that the Ultimate version is worth 45 bucks.